[WAKI] Kore wa miyako kitayama Murasakino
([WAKI] I am a priest living at Urin-in in Murasakino,)
Unrinin ni kyojiu no sō nite sōrō.
(in the Northern hills of the capital.)
Ware ichige no aida hana wo tate sōrō.
(I have offered flowers throughout the summer.)
Haya ango mo sugigata ni nari sōraeba.
(As my period of retreat is coming to a close,)
Iroyoki hana wo atsume
(I will gather fine blossoms)
hana no kuyō wo toriokonawabaya to omoi sōrō.
(and perform a memorial service for the flowers.)
[WAKI] Uyamatte mosu rikkakuyo no koto.
([WAKI] With reverence, I proclaim this memorial service for flowers.)
Migi hijō somoku tari to iedomo.
(Though they are said to be insentient plants,)
Kono hana korin ni hiraketari.
(these flowers blossom in wide woodlands.)
Ani kokoro nashi to iwanya.
(How could they be said to be without feelings?)
Nakanzuku dei wo ideshi hachisu.
(Especially the lotus appearing from the mud)
Ichijōmyōden no daimoku tari.
(and that has become the title of the one sublime law.)
Kono kechien ni hikarete.
(Drawn by this time even plants, trees,)
Sōmo' kokudo shi'kaijō bu'tndō.
(all the earth, achieve Buddhahood.)
[SHITE] Te ni toreba
([SHITE] As when the hand takes them,)
Tabusa ni kegaru tatenagara
(the hand itself sullies them.)
Miyo no hotoke ni
(To the Buddhas of the Three Realms)
Hanatatematsuru.
(I offer them as they are.)
[WAKI] Fushigiyana ima made wa
([WAKI] How strange! Until now)
Sōka ryoyō to shite mietsuru naka ni
(I saw them only as flowers grasses, yet among them)
Shiroki hana no onore hitori emi no mayu wo
(I see a single white flower whose brows seem)
Hiraketaru wa
(to unfold in a smile)
Ikanaru hana wo tatekeruzo.
(What manner of flower are you offering ?)
[SHITE] Oroka no osō no ōseyana
([SHITE] A foolish question, holy priest.)
Tasokaredoki no ori naru ni
(Though in this twilight hour you see it,)
Nadoka wa sore to goranzezaru sari nagara
(You do not recognize this flower!)
Na wa hito mekite iyashiki kakio ni kakaritareba
(Its name seeming human, on lowly hedges it hangs,)
Shiroshi mesanu wa kotowari nari.
(that you do not know its name is reasonable.)
Kore wa iugao no hana nite sōrō.
(This is the 'evening face' flower.)
[WAKI] Geni geni sazo to iugao no
([WAKI] Indeed, it is an "evening face"!)
Hana no aruji wa ikanaru hito zo
(Who is it that has offered this flower?)
[SHITE] Nanorazu to tsuiniwa shiroshi mesarubeshi.
([SHITE] Without giving my name you will know it in the end.)
Ware wa kono hana no kusa no kage yori mairitari.
(I have come from this flower's shadow.)
[WAKI] Sate wa kono yo ni naki hito no
([WAKI] So then, are you no longer in the world)
Hana no kuyō ni awan tame ka.
(and came to attend this memorial service for flowers?)
Sore ni tsuketemo na nori tamae.
(But please, you must tell me your name.)
[SHITE] Na wa ari nagara naki ato ni.
([SHITE] I have a name, though I am no longer alive,)
Narishi mukashi no monogatari.
(part of an old story.)
[WAKI] Nanigashi no in ni mo
([WAKI] At a certain mansion,)
[SHITE] Tsune wa samurō makoto ni wa.
([SHITE] I could always be found, indeed it is so.)
[JIUTAI] Gojō atari to iugao no.
([JIUTAI] Near Gojō, she said, of the "evening face.")
Gojō atari to iugao no.
(Near Gojō, she said, of the "evening face.")
Sora meseshi ma ni yume to nari.
(In the moment the eyes turn aside, she becomes a dream.)
Omokage bakari naki ato no
(Only her image lingers behind)
tachibana no kage ni kakurekeri.
(as she disapperas in the shadow of the flowers.)
Tachibana no kage ni kakurekeri.
(She disappears in the shadow of the flowers.)
[KYŌGEN] Kayō ni sorō mono wa,
([KYŌGEN] I am someone who lives)
Miyako kitayama atari ni, sumai suru mono nite sorō.
(in the Kitayama area of the capital.)
Uketamawari sōraeba,
(I have heard that near here, )
atari chikaki, Unrin-in ni oite, ichige no aida,
(at Unrin-in, there will be memorial services)
hana no kuyō no gozasōrō yoshi.
(for the lowers offered over the summer.)
Uketamawarioyobite sōrō hodo ni warera mo, mairayaba to zonzuru.
(This being the case, I too, intend to go there.)
Makoto ni, kon-nitta mairu hito mo sukunaku,
(Truly, as few people are going there this evening,)
nani to yaran, mono sabite sōrō yo.
(it is rather melancholy.)
[WAKI] Nōnō katagata wa kono atari no hito nite sōrō ka.
([WAKI ]Ho, there! Are you someone from around here ?)
[KYŌGEN] Nakanaka, kono atari no mono nite sōro.
([KYŌGEN]  Indeed, I am a person from this area.)
[WAKI] Sayō ni sōrawaba, mazu chikō, oniri sōrae mono wo,
([WAKI] If that's the case, first of all, could you come closer ?)
tazunetaki koto no sōro.
(There is something I would like to ask you.)
[KYŌGEN] Kokoroe mōshite sōro.
([KYŌGEN] Certainly.)
Sate, ontazunenasaretaki to wa,
(Well then, what is the matter)
ikayō naru, goyō nite sōrōzo.
(you would like to ask me about ?)
[WAKI] Oboshimeshi yorazaru mōshi koto nite sōraedomo.
([WAKI] While it isn't a circumstance of much importance,)
Inishie, Gojō atari ni, Iugao no ue no sumasetamaishi shisai,
(I would like you to tell me the particulars of the story of Lady Yūgao,)
onmonogatari sōrae.
(of the Evening Faces, who lived here long ago.)
[KYŌGEN] Kore wa, omoimoyoranu koto wo, ontazune nasare sōrō mono kana.
([KYŌGEN] This is an unexpected request you've made of me.)
Warera mo sayō no koto kuwashiku wa zonzezu sōrōga, oyoso,
(I don't know about the situation in much detail, but )
Uketamawaritarutōri, monogatari mōsōzuru nite sōro.
(I will do the best I can to tell you the story as I have heard it.)
Saruhodo ni, iugao no ue to mōshitaru, onkata wa,
(Well then, the one known as Lady Yūgao was the daughter)
sanminochiūjō no, onsokujo nite,
(of a middle captain of the third rank, and,)
saru shisai no koto sōraite,
(owing the certain circumstances, )
Gojō atari ni shinobi ite goza aritaru to mōsu.
(she came to live in seclusion in the area of Gojo. )
Mata sono koro, Hikaru Genji wo,
(Also at the at time, Hikaru Genji)
Rokujō miyasudokoro no kata e onkayoinasare sōrō ga.
(was paying regular visit to the home of Lady Rokujo.)
Orifushi Gojō atari wo, tōrare shikaba,
(On occasion he would pass through the Gojo area)
shōya ni iugao no hana,
(and it happened that there was a simple dwelling there)
migoto ni sakimidarete sōrō hodo ni,
(with "evening faces" blooming in splendid profusion.)
Koremitsu wo mesare, ano hana,
(He called Koremitsu to him, )
taorite maire to no onkoto nari.
(and requested that he go pluck a blossom.)
Koremitsu mizuishin no motte, sono hana wo shomō mōsare shikaba,
(When Koremitsu spoke to his attendant,)
shōya yori warabe wo idashi.
(a child came out of the house, and,)
Shibaraku sore ni, onmachiare tote,
(having asked that he wait there for a wile, soon after,)
sono nochi, shiroki ōgi no, tsuma ito kogashitaru ni,
(offered him a white fan, its edges perfumed with incense,)
iugao no hana wo soete sashi idasu.
(on which rested a blossom of the "evening faces".)
Mizuishin kore wo uketori, Koremitsu ni mairasekereba.
(The attendant took this and returned with it to Koremitsu.)
Koremitsu, Genji e mairasesōrō tokoro ni,
(Koremistu went with it to Genji, who, )
sono ōgi no fuchi ni, isshu no uta no goza sōrō hodo ni,
(seeing then that there was a poem on the edge of the fan,)
isogi gohenka wo nasare.
(quickly wrote a verse in reply.)
Sono hana yue ni, Iugao no ue ni mamie tamai,
(Because of that flower, he was drawn to the Lady Yūgao,)
onchigiri asakaraneba, sono nochi
(of the evening faces, and as the vows they shared were not shallow,)
nanigashi in e ontomonari nasare.
(after that he came to stay together with her there at her dwelling.)
Iroiro kiyoku bengi no chigiri
(Even as the purity of the many pledges)
asakarazusōrō tokoro ni,
(they exchanged were profound-)
nanbō, fushigi naru koto nite sōro.
(By the Sacred Treaures! Mysteroiusly,)
Iugao no ue wa, mononoke ni okasaretamai,
(Lady Yūgao was possessed)
Munashiku nararetaru to mōsu.
(by some sort of vengeful spirit, and it is said that all was lost... )
Hikaru Genji no onnageki mōsumo,
(As to Hikaru Genji's grief, its depth was limitless)
orokanaru tei nite goza aritaru to mōsu.
(as there was nothing to be done for her, it is said.)
Mazu, warera no uketamawaritaru shisai,
(In any event, those are the details,)
ōkata kaku no gotoku nite sōrō ga.
(at least in broad terms, as I know them.)
Tadaima wa nani to, oboshi meshite yaran,
(But why are you interested in this )
ontazune fushin ni zonjisōro.
(and asking me about this matter now ? I find it suspicious.)
[WAKI] Nengoro ni uketamari sōrō mono kana.
([WAKI] I'm grateful that you have described the matter so thoroughly.)
Soregashi ichige no aida, hana no kuyō wo
(When I was performing a memorial service for flowers)
toriokonai sōrō tokoro ni,
(offered during the summer, a woman appeared)
nyoshō ichinin shiroki hana wo taterare sōrō hodo ni.
(and gave me a white flower.)
Hana no aruji wa ikanaru hito zo
(I asked who, and what sort of person, she was with the flower,)
tazunete sōraeba, sore ni tsuki
(to which she replied speaking of the Lady of the Evening Faces)
Iugao no ue no on koto wo waga mi no ue no yō ni iisute,
(as though she spoke of herself.)
sono mama hana no kage nite sugata wo
(Then she disappeared in the shadow of the flowers.)
Miushinaite sōrō yo.
(That's what happened.)
[KYŌGEN] Gongodōdan, fushigi naru koto wo
([KYŌGEN] How astonishing!)
Ōsesōrōmono kana.
(What a wondrous thing you have related to me.)
Sate wa warera ga suiryō mōsu ni,
(Now then, if I may say what I suppose, it can only be that)
kayō ni hana no kuyō wo no gozasōrōaida,
(when you were performing the memorial service for flowers,)
iugao no hana no sei, mata wa, inishie Iugao no ue gobōshin.
(the spirit of the "yugao flower", and also the ghost of Lady Yūgao,)
Araware idetaru to zonjisōrō ga shika to wa zonzezusōro.
(Lady of the Evening Faces, of long ago appeared before you.)
Sarinagara, osō tattoku mashimasu ni yori
(This being the case, I believe that due to )
ontomurai nimo azukaritaku oboshimeshi,
(the merit emanating from your Reverence,)
Iugao no ue no gobōshin
(the spirit of the Lady Yūgao appeared to you in order)
araware idetaru to zonjisōro.
(to ask that you offer prayers for her deliverance.)
Sayō ni sōrawaba kore yori Gojō atari e oniri sōrawaba,
(If that is the case, you should go now to the Gojo area,)
kidoku naru koto mo gozasōrō hodo ni,
(where a miracle will surely occur. Then you should pray earnestly)
sono nochi nengoro ni tomurōte ontōri arekashi to zonjisōro.
(for her enlightenment as she has requested of you.)
[WAKI] Warera mo sayō ni zonjisōrōaida,
([WAKI] As I also believe this to be true,)
Gojō atari ni tachi ni ide,
(I will go to the Gojo area and pray there)
Iugao no ue no onato wo tomurai mōsōzuru nite sōro.
(For the ghost of the Lady Yūgao and her deliverance.)
[KYŌGEN] Sore wa chikagoro nite sōro. Osō onide nite sōrawaba
([KYŌGEN] As you will be going there shortly,)
warera mo onato yori mairōzuru nite sōro.
(I'll follow after your Recerence in a while.)
[WAKI] Yagate atoyori kitarare sōrae.
([WAKI] In due time then, I will expect you there.)
[KYŌGEN] Kokoroe mōshitesōro.
([KYŌGEN] I'll do as you say.)
[WAKI] Arashi oshie ni shitagatte
([WAKI] Following what I was told earlier)
Gojō atari ni kite mireba
(I have to go to Gojo to see:)
Genimo mukashi no imashi dokoro
(Indeed, the mansion, as in the past,)
Sanagara yadori mo iugao no
(the dwelling and its evening faces.)
Hyōtan shibashiba munashi
(Gourds now often empty,)
Kusa Gannen ga chimata ni shigeshi.
(and (Genken's) Yen Yūan's home overgrown with weeds.)
[SHITE] Reijō fukaku tozaseri,
([SHITE] Densely closed off by goosefoot,)
Sekiyō no zansei aratani
(the evening sun creates mountain shadows,)
Mado wo ugattesaru.
(comes through the window and then leaves.)
[JIUTAI] Shiutan no izumi no koe.
([JIUTAI] The faint sound of a hidden spring.)
Ame Genken ga toboso wo uruō su.
(Rain dampens Genken's (Yüan Hsien) gate.)
[SHITE] Saredomo sode wo uruosuwa
([SHITE] But what dampens the sleeves is)
Rosan no yuki no akebono.
(dawn on the snow on Mount Lu.)
[JIUTAI] Sōtō ni mukō rōgetta.
([JIUTAI] Through the east window the limpid moon,)
Sōtō ni mukō rōgetta.
(Through the east window the limpid moon,)
Kinsht'n ni atari
(on the zither stand casts its light.)
Shiushō no aki no yama.
(Beyond the hedge, the autumn mountains.)
Monosugo no iubeya.
(Such a desolate evening!)
[JIUTAI] Geni monosugoki kaze no oto.
([JIUTAI] Indeed, the desolate sound of the wind,)
Sudo no takegaki arishi yo no.
(the wicker bamboo fence as in the past.)
Yume no sugata wo mise tamae.
(Please show me your form in a dream)
Bodai wo fukaku tomurawan.
(I will pray in earnest for your soul.)
[SHITE] Yama no ha no kokoro mo shirade yuku tsuki wa,
([SHITE] The moon, uncertain of the mountain ridge as it went)
uwa no sora nite taeshi ato no.
(and disappeared in the sky high above without a trace.)
Mata itsuka ōbeki.
(When will they meet again ?)
[JIUTAI] Yamagat'n no kakio aru tomo oriori wa.
([JIUTAI] Though the mountain dweller's fence has fallen into ruin, from time to time)
[SHITE] Aware wo kakeyo nadeshiko no
([SHITE] Show compassion for the wild pink)
[JIUTAI] Hana no sugata wo mo mamienaba.
([JIUTAI] Blossom, if I reaveal the form)
[SHITE] Ato tō beki ka
([SHITE] Will you pray for my soul ?)
[JIUTAI] Nakanaka ni.
([JIUTAI] Certainly, I will.)
[SHITE] Saraba to omoi iugao no.
([SHITE] Thinking, "well then,"  the "evening face")
[JIUTAI] Kusa no hashitomi oshiakete-n,
([JIUTAI] The vine-covered lattice shutter pushes open,)
tachi-izuru onsugata.
(revealing her form as she steps out.)
Miruni namida mo todomarazu.
(At the sight tears flow without stopping.)
[JIUTAI] Sono koro Genji no.
([JIUTAI] At that time, Genji)
Chiujo to kikoeshi wa,
(the Middle Captain as he was called,)
kono iugao no kusa makura.
(shared the grass pillow of this "evenig face" for a brief rest.)
Tada karibushi no yo mo sugara,
(Through the night they heard from next door)
tonari wo kikeba Miyoshino ya.
(a pilgrim's voice in prayer )
Mitake Shōji no mikoe nite.
(about ascending the sacred peak at Miyoshino.)
Namutōraidōshi Mirokub'to zo tonaekeru.
("Save us, holy guide of the way in the future, Maitreya Buddha!", he chanted.)
Ima mo ta'toki okuyō ni so no toki no omoi
(Even now this service has brought back the memory)
iderarete sozoro ni nururu tamoto ka na.
(of that time and unmittingly tears dampen my sleeves.)
Nao sore yori mo wasurenuwa
(But more than that, I cannot forget the evening)
Genji kono yado wo misome tamaishi iutsukata.
(when Genji first saw this house.)
Koremitsu wo mameki yose.
(Beckoning to Koremitsu,)
Ano hana ore tono tamaeba.
("Pick that flower for me," he ordered.)
Shiraki ōgi no tsumaitō kogashi tarishini.
(On a white fan, its edges perfumed with incense,)
Kono hana wo orite mairasuru.
(the flower was picked and presented.)
[SHITE] Genji tsukuzuku to goranjite.
([SHITE] Genji, gazing at it intently,)
[JIUTAI]  Uchi watasu ō-chikatahito ni tō totemo.
([JIUTAI] "Of you passing in the distance..." he asked)
Sore sono hana to kotaezu wa.
(and if I had not answered about the flower)
Tsui ni shirademo arubeki ni ai ni o-ōgi wo te ni fururu.
(forever we must have remained strangers. We were brought together )
Chigiri no hodo no ureshisa.
(by the fan touched by our hands, in a joyous pledge of love.)
Oriori tazune yoru naraba.
(If from time to time)
Sadamenu ama no kono yado no.
( I visit this dwelling of a homeless fishergirl)
Aruji wo tare to shiranamino-n,
(not knowing the owner's name, I hope )
yorube no sue wo tanoman
(to be as white foam finding at last the shore, he thought, )
to i-ishu wo eiji owashimasu.
(and composed a poem.)
[JIUTAI] Orite koso
([JIUTAI] If you pick it)
[SHITE] Orite koso
([SHITE] If you pick it)
Soreka tomo mime
(then, indeed you will know it)
Tasokare ni
(in the twilight)
[JIUTAI] Hono bono mieshi
([JIUTAI] Faintly visible:)
Hana no iugao.
(The flowering "evening face",)
(the flowering "evening face",)
Hana no iugao.
(the flowering "evening face".)
[SHITE] Tsui no yadori wa shirase mo-ōshitsu.
([SHITE] "As my final home I have shown you)
[JIUTAI]  Tsune ni wa tomurai.
([JIUTAI] Always pray for me)
[SHITE] Owashimase to.
([SHITE] I beg you", she said, and)
[JIUTAI] Iutsuke no tori no ne,
([JIUTAI] as she spoke the crowing of the cocks,)
[SHITE] Kane mo shikiri ni.
([SHITE] The tolling of the bells too,)
Tsuge wataru shinonome.
(announce the coming of dawn.)
[JIUTAI] Asama nimo narinubeshi.
([JIUTAI] As nothing will be hidden in the morning light,)
Akenu saki ni to iugao no yadori.
("Before dawn breaks, to the dwelling of the "evening face",)
Akenu saki ni to iugao no yadori no.
("before dawn breaks, to the dwelling of the "evening face",)
Mata hashitomi no uchi ni irite,
(she says, and again goes within the lattice shutter,)
sono mama yume to zo nari ni keru.
(just so, becoming one with the dream.)